Yeah
Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you.
1. Friends, on this third Sunday of Easter, we have this magnificent gospel from the very end of the Gospel of John, chapter 21, verses 1 through 11.
and it's so rich theologically and the tradition is just love this passage and drawn out all sorts of implications.
What I want to do,
To get at it is to focus on seeing.
Peter.
now, saint peter, obviously.
Great saint.
uh, the chief of the apostles. He's the rock upon whom Jesus builds the church. The cross I'm wearing has Saint Peter on it. Uh, his, his basilica is the greatest church in the world.
In the world, millions come to venerate his tomb. So no one doubts the importance and greatness of Peter. Peter.
However,,
There's no question that the Gospels present Peter as a deeply ambiguous
Figure.
Which is why all of us who are kind of shady, ambiguous figures can learn a lot from him.
and from how the Lord
Deal with him.
So, you know, first of all, Jesus must have recognized all kinds of qualities in Peter.
That's why he chose him as the chief of the apostles. He must have seen qualities of leadership and intelligence and all that.
There's no question furthermore that the
It's his great confession. You are the Christ, the Son of the living God. That's the rock upon which Jesus builds his church.
So, no one doubts the significance of Peter. Remember that scene in Caesarea Philippi.
Right after the confession.
When Jesus begins talking about the cross,
And it's Peter, maybe he's sort of feeling, well, it's my role now. I'm the head of the apostles. It's Peter.
who says, I mean, Lord, heaven forbid this should ever happen to you.
And then he hears it's the greatest rebuke anywhere in the Bible.
Jesus says to get thee behind me, Satan.
So, I mean, right after he's named him The Rock, he also recognizes this very negative character.
quality in peter now we see exactly what it is.
And in a way, it's always what the problem is.
It's an aversion to the cross.
So yes, he's correctly confessed Jesus as the Lord.
But he doesn't want.
The cross.
And that's why Jesus calls him
Seton.
So, we see this now throughout the Gospels, but
The ambiguity of Peter reaches its high point.
In all the events surrounding the passion and death of the Lord, it's where
Peter's compromised character becomes
Clearest clearest
Where do we see it?
Remember the gospel of John.
At the Last Supper.
When Jesus
makes to wash the feet of his disciples.
We're so used to it now, but it was shocking in his time and place to do that. For someone who is recognized as a master to get down into this situation,
Into this
It was a menial position. It was something that you wouldn't even ask a slave to do, and yet Jesus is doing this to his disciples.
Well, that's what the gospel is all about, isn't it? I mean, that's the way of Jesus. It's not the way of worldly triumph. It's the way of even the most menial service and love.
But who barks at it?
Peter!
He's the chief of the of the apostles it's peter the rock
He says, no, no, no, but you're not going to do that to
Well, this means that he's resisting.
The way of Jesus.
He confessed incorrectly, but he's not.
getting it. That same resistance to the cross is manifested there. No, no, you're not going to wash my feet.
We hear this in Luke's gospel. And for my money,
It's one of the most frightening lines in the whole New Testament.
This is...
Jesus now speaking to Peter.
Simon
Listen.
Satan
Has demanded to sift all of you like wheat
But once you've turned back,
Strengthen your brothers.
Simon,
Satan.
Remember Jesus said, get thee behind me, Satan.
Satan is demanded to sift you like wheat. What does that mean?
Well, that's that process that was common in the ancient world of separating wheat from the chaff.
Remember when John the Baptist talks about the winnowing fan? Same idea. Yeah.
you take this rake and you throw the the ah grain up in the air and then the wind would blow separating the wheat from the chaff.
Sifting.
Separating out.
But now, now it's...
Satan doing the sifting. What does that mean?
That means Satan.
is going to try to
To separate all that's good in you,
To throw that away as though it were chaff.
And to keep the chaff behind.
it's a frightening image because.
Look it, we're all ambiguous people. We all have good and bad in us. Imagine the devil now is
is going to be
Carefully separating out the good and the bad and.
Throwing the good away,
Letting it blow away in the wind so that only what's worst in us remains. That's what the image says.
Do you know what does this to us often?
crisis and trial and difficulty. You might be going along okay and you're both good and bad but the good is kind of winning the war but then there comes time
100% time of trial.
And then,
Something happens where the good and bad and you get separated out.
And,
And sometimes it's the bad that remains. That's what the Lord is saying.
To Peter,
And that's exactly what's going to happen now.
They're all during the passion going to be sifted.
By Satan.
Well, what's right after that?
They come to Gethsemane.
Jesus now at this, this,
Terrible moment of anguish.
And he takes Peter, James, and John as closest disciples with him.
He prays and sweats blood in his anguish.
Peter,
Falls asleep.
Not a good thing in the Bible to fall asleep.
It means you're inattentive. It means you're not up to it. It means you're not
You're not standing post.
And so what does he hear? Simon.
Are you asleep?
Keep awake and pray.
that you may not come to the trial. Well, the same thing. That's the trial. Satan's sifting you like wheat.
See the point here?
Peter's not doing well.
He's not doing well at this moment.
Then,
comes the worst moment of all.
Jesus is arrested.
Peter follows him and he goes into the courtyard of the high priest's house.
He's warming his hands by the fire. It's a cold evening.
And then,
The scapegoating mob begins to form.
Hmm?
You were with Jesus, someone said.
Peter denied it.
No, no.
someone else.
This man, he's one of them.
Again
Peter denied it.
And I get it. This is scapegoating mob. This is dangerous stuff.
Mob starts forming around you.
They're not going to be gentle with you. This is a dangerous business.
Then,
A third time.
certainly you're one of them.
For you're a Galilean. his his accent gave him away.
But he began to curse
And he swore an oath.
Now, you know, we think cursing, you know, using a bad word, but it's much more than that here.
Taking an oath, taking an oath.
invoking God himself.
invoking God. He says,
I don't know this man.
Well, everybody,
Satan will sift you like wheat.
You bet.
Separating out what's good in you and letting what's bad in you remain.
Well, there you see it on full display.
Three times.
He denies that he even knows Jesus, even invoking God himself, taking an oath to that effect.
Peter is not in a good
Space.
We hear it's a beautiful detail, completely credible.
That when the cock crows that point, as Jesus predicted it would,
Peter breaks down and weeps. I mean, his inner state at this point has been compared, I think, pretty correctly.
To that of Judas.
Practically at the point of despair over how far he's fallen.
How effectively Satan has sifted.
Peter, at this point,
Well, that's the image we get.
Everybody. As the life of Jesus comes to its high point, this is the state of
that Peter is in. And you know,
St. Peter symbolizes the church.
And so all of us members of the mystical body are meant to kind of move into this space.
Okay.
With all that in mind,
Let's cut to the chase now of this gospel from John.
The Lord is risen from the dead.
"'Peter indeed ran to the tomb "'easter Sunday morning to see.'
But now they're fishing in the Sea of Tiberias. They're back in their home country.
He's in the boat. Peter is with these seven others.
I'm going fishing
We'll come with you.
Well, this is the church. Whenever you have
Peter in the boat with the other apostles, it's an image of the church.
And they, they fish and fish all night, catch nothing.
Morning comes.
And they spy this figure on the shore.
He tells them to put the net on the other side. Oh, we've been trying all night.
They do it and of course they bring in this miraculous draft of 153 large fish.
At which point,
And John, as he usually does, he intuits, it's the Lord.
But here's what I want you to see.
At this point, there's a really curious detail. They're fishing, so I know they're not going to be wearing their formal clothes.
But it says that
Peter,
He threw on some clothes because he was naked.
Our translation rather demurely says he was lightly clad, but that's not right. The Greek is Gymnos here.
Gimnas means naked.
That's why a gymnasium, the place where you would, you know, exercise naked, that's a gymnasium. So Peter is gymnos, he's naked, and hearing is the one
Yes, the Lord is the Lord.
He throws on clothes. Now,
Who does that remind you of?
Let's go right back to the beginning of the Bible.
Adam, before the fall, is unselfconsciously naked, right, in the presence of the Lord.
Why does he hide himself?
After he sinned, it is shame.
oh, i hid myself, you know, i heard you come and hid myself.
Who told you you were naked?
You must have eaten from their tree.
Here's Peter now. He stands for all of us sinners, all of us who get sifted by Satan.
He's ashamed.
He's ashamed to be in the presence of the Lord. That's why he throws them in clothes.
When he comes to the shore, Jesus
prepares a breakfast for them.
And then,
He engages in some very important
Spiritual direction.
Spiritual formation.
Listen.
He takes Peter aside.
Simon, again he calls him his beautiful, that's his original name.
Simon,
Son of John. Do you love me more than these?
yes, lord, you know i love you.
Feed my land.
And then with slight variations.
Jesus asked that same question.
Simon, do you love me?
Lord, you know everything. you know I love you.
Feed my sheep.
Simon, do you love me?
Lord, of course I love you.
Feed my lambs.
Now, is,
St. Augustine said long ago, and every single Christian preacher, including me, is repeated.
Three denials.
Have to be countered by
Three affirmations.
And what's the implication of the affirmation? Lord, I love you. What's it mean to love Jesus?
"'Feed my lambs, feed my sheep, "'feed my sheep.'
Feed my lambs.
See, to walk the way of Jesus,
is to walk the way of washing of the feet.
It means
Embracing the cross of self-denial
and love the other.
It's as simple and as spiritually complex as that.
Do you love me? And Peter is forced to say three times, yes, yes, yes, well then feed my sheep.
And then this
line which I think everybody sums up
Christian spirituality, if you want.
Jesus says, "Amen, amen, I say to you." In other words,
Pay attention.
This is important.
When you were younger, you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted.
But when you grow old,
You will stretch out your hands, and some one else will dress you and lead you.
Where you do not want to go.
Now,
We hear that he's speaking of the death that Peter would die.
His arms stretched out.
Upside down on the cross in Rome.
But think of this more generally, everybody. When you're young, full yourself, full of ego,
"'Dress yourself. Go where you want to go. It's my life. Don't tell me what to do.'"
That's kid stuff. See, when you're young, that's kid stuff, spiritually speaking.
But when you're older,
That means you've come to spiritual maturity.
You let go of those childish games.
And you allow someone else to dress you. That means the Holy Spirit.
And take you where your ego doesn't want to go. Well, that's what the spirit typically does.
Can the spirits leading you to greater love, to greater love, to greater love,
"'Feed my lambs, feed my sheep, feed my lambs.'
See, we're all meant to identify here with Peter.
we've all been sifted by satan. we're all ambiguous characters.
We need to.
Say,
Again and again and again.
Lord, I love you.
Lord, I love you. Lord, I love you.
And then,
Be willing to feed his sheep
That's how we become his disciples.
And God bless you!
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire dot Org.